---
slug: "/stories/sachinranade"
date: "2018-07-13"
title: "Sachin Ranade"
tags: ["story", "event", "nyu"]
---
### Official Story
Sachin obtained his PhD in Neuroscience from Stony Brook University. He performed his doctoral research with Zachary Mainen at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) where he studied the behavioural correlates of neurons in the serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus of rats during an olfactory discrimination task. He continued at CSHL for his postdoctoral research with Adam Kepecs, where he developed the technology to identify channelrhodopsin labeled neurons using optogenetic tagging in freely behaving mice. He applied this technique to elucidate the differential role of two interneuron subtypes, expressing parvalbumin and somatostatin, during a reward foraging task as well as collaborated on applying this technique to study behavioural correlates of different cell types in the cholinergic basal forebrain. He currently works as an Associate Editor at Nature Communications, the flagship open-access journal of the Nature Research Group of journals, where he oversees content in the areas of cognitive, computational and systems neuroscience.

### Unofficial Story
Growing up in Pune, in Western India, Sachin enjoyed playing basketball, dabbling in Indian classical music and wandering in the surrounding mountains. He always had a keen interest in science. Following an undergraduate degree in Microbiology and a Master's degree in Molecular Biology, he joined a wildlife parasite ecology group as a field biologist to fulfill his wanderlust. He spent a year discovering the diversity of parasitic flora in wild animals while exploring the forests of India. Animal behaviour fascinated him. How does brain activity manifest in such myriad behaviors? With this in mind, he joined the graduate program at Stony Brook University to learn about neuroscience and decided to study the neural basis of olfactory behaviors. After many exploratory projects failed to take off, he inherited an exciting but difficult project. He studied how neurons in the serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus respond during olfactory decision making. He continued research in CSHL to apply the newly developed tools of optogenetics to identify genetically specified neurons and helped establish this technology in behaving mice. A short stint turned into a 7 year postdoc. While exploring academic positions, an ad for an editorial position in Nature Communications popped up and piqued his interest. It felt like a good fit, given his wide research interests so he joined a fledgling neuroscience editorial team at Nature Communications and has been an integral part of the journal's growth.

