---
slug: "/stories/wendysuzuki"
date: "2018-02-02"
title: "Wendy Suzuki"
tags: ["story", "event", "nyu"]
---
### Official Story
Wendy Suzuki received her undergraduate degree in physiology and human anatomy at the University of California, Berkeley in 1987 studying with Prof. Marion C. Diamond, a leader in the field of brain plasticity. She went on to earn her Ph.D. in Neuroscience from U.C. San Diego in 1993 with David Amaral, Stuart Zola and Larry Squire and completed a post-doctoral fellowship at the National Institutes of Health with Robert Desimone before accepting her faculty position at New York University in 1998.Wendy is currently a Professor of Neural Science and Psychology at New York University. She is best known for her studies on the anatomy, physiology and function of the non-human primate brain areas in the medial temporal lobe critical for long-term memory. More recently she has started to examine the neuro-behavioral, physiological and neurochemical effects of physical aerobic activity on a wide range of brain and cognitive functions in people. She is the recipient of the Donald B. Lindsley Award from the Society for Neuroscience as well as the prestigious Troland Research award from the National Academy of Sciences as well as an award-winning teacher.

### Unofficial Story
The major science theme of Wendy's career has been brain plasticity. However, Wendy's career can been subdivided into two distinct parts. The first part focused on identifying the cortical brain areas important for memory and then studying the neurophysiology of how these brain areas participate in new memory formation. This first half of Wendy's career proceeded in a very classic way with great advisors, great institutions, numerous grants and awards, teaching, administration and ultimately promotion. The second half of career started when Wendy started to ask not only how brain plasticity works in a respected well-studied animal model system, but how does it work in her own brain and what happens if she tried to stretch her own brain plasticity to explore those limits on a personal level. This started when she joined a gym to help loose the 25 pounds she gained as she worked to gain tenure. This regular exercise not only helped her get back in shape as well as loose those 25 pounds (along with some serious carb monitoring), but this made her notice how much physical activity seemed to not only improve her mood, but her memory (i.e. what she was studying in her own lab) as well as her focus. A quick look at the literature showed the growing number of studies supporting the neurobiology of what she was noticing in herself. This simple observation, set off an avalanche of changes in Wendy's personal and professional life that included, shifting her entire research program from the neurophysiology of memory in non-human primates to how physical aerobic exercise enhances brain function in humans, writing a book about that experience, giving 4 TEDX talks, one 2017 TEDWomen talk and countless other interviews and podcasts on the neuroscience of exercise in the human brain. Most recently (and on the actual 20th anniversary of her arrival in New York), Wendy debuted a science performance piece sponsored by the Simon's Foundation that seeks to pair scientists with theatre directors to create new ways of communicating science to the general public. Her first piece is called Memory's First Kiss and it debuted on January 15, 2018 at Caveat Theater/Science Nightclub. She is currently working on her second book and her second performance piece that will focus on the neuroscience of exercise on the brain.

