---
slug: "/stories/xaviercastellanos"
date: "2017-10-20"
title: "Xavier Castellanos"
tags: ["story", "event", "nyu"]
---
### Official Story
Xavier Castellanos studied Chomskian linguistics at Vassar College, experimental psychology at the University of New Orleans, and medicine at Louisiana State University in Shreveport. He was in the first cohort of "triple board" residents (combined training in pediatrics, psychiatry and child and adolescent psychiatry) at the University of Kentucky, after which he spent a decade conducting child psychiatry research at the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda. In 2001 he moved to New York University, where he is endowed professor of child and adolescent psychiatry, professor of radiology, neuroscience and physiology and an affiliate member of the NYU department of psychology. His work has focused on using brain imaging to better understand neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. He was an early advocate of examining low-frequency fluctuations in brain function and in behavior - both of which have become mainstream lines of investigation. Listed by Thomson Reuters as one the top 1% cited scientists in psychiatric neuroscience since 2014, he has served on many national and international review committees and was Vice-Chair of the American Psychiatric Association DSM-5 Workgroup on ADHD.

### Unofficial Story
Xavier Castellanos' parents were both Bolivian, but he was born in Madrid ... long story. Shortly before his third birthday, his high school graduate mother returned to Bolivia to raise her three children on her own, using her one outstanding ability - English fluency. She became a Spanish teacher at the U.S. Embassy inLa Paz, where one of her students encouraged her to emigrate to the U.S. She arrived in Washington D.C. in 1961, leaving Xavier and his younger siblings with their grandmother for a year. Immersion in English followed, including an unhappy year in a religious military boarding school. The next move was to New Orleans, where Xavier figured out how to talk football instead of academics with peers. The opportunity to skip English class one day led to a needs-based full scholarship to attend Vassar College, which had just begun to accept men. The transition from parochial rule-bound high school to a nearly rule-free liberal arts college was precarious at first. Fortunately, the second semester grade (in the full year English 101 course) covered the nearly disastrous procrastination of the first semester. A burned out Math ABD assistant professor (someone else published a proof of the theorem he had been working on for 7 years) introduced him to Chomsky and his revolution in linguistics. This, along with his desire to rekindle his Hispanic connection in the Vassar Wesleyan Semester in Madrid, became the focus of an independent major in linguistics. This culminated in a Chomskian analysis of reflexive verbs in Spanish which was fascinating but excruciatingly solitary work. On graduating, Xavier had no direction other than a vague desire to pursue further academic study, in anything other than linguistics. At the same time, Xavier's mother realized her current place of employment in New Orleans was about to close - money laundering by the director... another long story. Still at her day job, she dictated translations at night, with Xavier as the unpaid stenographer and secretarial staff. In exchange, at Xavier's suggestion, his mother wrote Jean Piaget, asking to translate one his books. He responded in a hand written letter - long since lost - referring her to his publishers. With his (implicit) recommendation, she negotiated a contract with D. Reidel Publishers, The Netherlands. Xavier and her young partner, who was fluent in French, but not in developmental psychology, spent the next year translating volume 23 of the Series on Genetic Epistemology into English: Psychology and Epistemology of Functions. Confronting inconsistencies in Piaget's use of terms (e.g., did he mean to differentiate scheme from schema, or did he forget he started with one and switched to the other?), Xavier sought consultation. The one local Piagetian, Anne Dean, connected Xavier with Piaget collaborator Hans Furth, her advisor. She also offered him graduate credit for his translation in the UNO psychology masters program and connected Xavier with Bob Porter, a psycholinguistics recently arrived from Haskins Labs. Bob was a dynamic enthusiastic professor and investigator who offered Xavier a research assistantship, even though Xavier had not formally joined the masters program. A year into the process, application became pro forma. Everything was on track for Xavier to go from UNO to UT Austin for a PhD in psycholinguistics, when Bob accepted a Fulbright to the Karolinska. Xavier continued to run the shadowing VCV experiment they eventually published, but in Bob's absence, the potential to participate in behavioral studies of endogenous opioids stimulated a change in advisors and focus. Castrating 150 rats for his masters thesis experiments (effects of absence of gonadal steroids on nociception) led Xavier to realize his talent/proclivity for improvisation was a poor fit for a career in basic science. He decided to consider medical school - provided he could make it through the organic chemistry hurdle. As a masters student, he was allowed to take classes at fill, and at no cost. He survived first semester orgo, and got the hang of it by the second semester. Once again, the second semester grade eclipsed the first. He negotiated to accelerate Inorganic, took Biology and Physics (full year for both) and prepared for the MCAT as if it were a marathon - which it is. His excellent scores were not enough to get him off the wait list at Hopkins - his first choice - but LSU in Shreveport was less choosy. LSU was as traditional a school as one could design, but it was also still highly subsidized by the state of Louisiana, which meant the student loans were minor. After 3.5 years of medical school, Xavier was once again undecided. Pediatrics, internal medicine, family medicine and neurology all seemed possibilities. The psychiatry program had been decidedly unimpressive - so that was off the list, until a classmate alerted him to a new program combining truncated (18 months each) general psychiatry, and child and adolescent psychiatry, with 24 months of pediatrics. Galvanized, Xavier applied to 4 of the 6 programs and was accepted at two. He chose the University of Kentucky largely because of the warmth of the director, Otto Kaak, professor of child and adolescent psychiatry, who became Xavier's next father figure. Three and a half years later, Xavier was again uncertain about next steps. Joining the faculty in Lexington seemed possible, but Xavier's wife suggested he consider a research fellowship. He applied for programs at NYU, Columbia, and NIMH. Then and now, few physicians want to spend years as postdocs, so he had his choice, and the murder rate in New York was still on the upswing - so it was Bethesda, to work under Judy Rapoport. At NIMH, Xavier was hired for a project begun in 1985 and still using 1980's approaches of examining catecholamine metabolites in body fluids - blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid. These turned out to be modestly interesting, but a side project of MRI scanning the same children who were getting their metabolites measured during double-blind drug studies resulted in a small positive finding, which encouraged all to continue to expand the sample - and which provided unexpected job security. The pilot study turned into a major 25 year longitudinal effort which was only concluded when the GE 1.5 Tesla scanner was finally scrapped. Xavier and Jay Giedd had been inadvertently given permanent NIH positions - they were the first to be converted from post-docs to staff scientists. Jay stayed another decade, but Xavier attended a meeting in NY in 1999 that convinced him to investigate extremely low frequency fluctuations in the brain. These were initially reported in basal ganglia neuronal firing rates by Judie Walters - who first identified dopamine neurons by their electrophysiology. Xavier wondered if such fluctuations might account for the inconsistencies which characterize ADHD, but Judy Rapoport did not share his enthusiasm, and she reminded him that he was not yet scientifically independent. After some prolonged back and forth, she finally said, "you might be right, but I don't understand it, and I can't defend it." Thus, when NYU was recruiting for someone to launch imaging studies in child psychiatry, Xavier's only question was about scientific independence, which was assured, along with substantial philanthropic support. A high-risk/high-reward effort to use near-infrared spectroscopic (NIRS) imaging was funded by a foundation - and the effort failed. The prototype instrument was too unwieldy to be used with children. Fortunately, the frequency-domain analytical methods Xavier's post-doc learned in the process of trying to make NIRS work transferred to response time time-series. This provided the first evidence that fluctuations in response times overlap those in BOLD in the frequencies which characterize the default and other intrinsic connectivity networks. Recruiting Mike Milham to do his residency in general and child/adolescent psychiatry at NYU was the next key step. Mike had obtained his MD/PhD at Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and he was eager to continue developing scientifically while training in psychiatry. Xavier was able to design a program of "scientific moonlighting" through which Mike established a functional imaging program during nights and weekends - and through numerous texts during regular hours. Repurposed task-based fMRI data analyzed by Mike confirmed the existence of task-negative (default) and task-positive networks, regardless of the age or diagnosis of the participants. The group shifted completely from NIRS to fMRI and began to collect pilot resting state scans on the CBI Allegra. Confronting widespread skepticism, Xavier and Mike wrote numerous grant applications - most of them to NIH. Fortunately, a pilot study with n=20/group including controls from Craigslist showed an interesting result. Its novelty and the hard lessons learned in the 9 submissions of a prior paper (Kelly et al. 2008; 3 strikes at Nat Neurosci, 3 at J Neurosci, and third submission accepted at Neuroimage) resulted in an acceptance by Biological Psychiatry 4 days before the first NIH grant was resubmitted. Unexpectedly, all of those early grants were funded - most on second submissions (there were 3 in those days) - resulting in the good problem of too much funding, too fast. The lab exploded, with recruits from Beijing, Dublin, Leuven, UCLA... Resting state exploded as a method and we joined the bandwagon. Our major methodological contributions were in response to Don Klein's insistence that we address test-retest reliability, which turned out to be mostly adequate, although some of that reliability probably reflects head motion... but the story continues and it's not all artifact. Our major cultural innovation was to vigorously champion open data sharing. In the process, one formerly too-large lab has become a constellation of labs, a dizzying series of Brain Hack events, Neuro Bureau parties and Brain Art Competitions all infused with a global camaraderie. It continues to be a wonderful ride - impossible to predict at the outset, and beyond all expectations.

